https://radiologyinplainenglish.com/chest-x-ray-pneumonia-vs-normal/
Chest X-rays are often ordered to evaluate a suspected pneumonia. Pneumonia is an infection of the lung.   Pneumonia can be caused by multiple types of organisms like bacteria, fungus, and viruses.  Normal chest X-ray shows clear lungs while the X-ray with pneumonia often shows areas of abnormal white or hazy lung. X-rays can often tell if you have a pneumonia.  Pneumonia can have multiple appearances.  Pneumonia can be confined to a small part of the lung or involve both lungs diffusely.   Some pneumonias can not be seen on X-ray or are very subtle. Pneumonia can have different appearances on chest X-ray.  Some pneumonias will have lung consolidation which means the lung is densely white in the area of pneumonia.  Other pneumonias such as that from viruses or some other organisms can have hazy lungs or branching and nodular opacities.    There are pneumonias which are poorly seen on X-rays. Pneumonia in the lungs will most commonly be seen as white areas superimposed on the normally black lung on chest X-ray.  Other appearances can be nodules or rounded spots, branching areas or subtle tiny white spots in the lung. What color is pneumonia on X-ray? Pneumonia will be white on X-ray.  Some pneumonias are hazy or less white.  Other pneumonias may simply be very subtle tiny white spots interspersed with normal lung (interstitial pattern). The normal lung is black on X-ray. The size of the pneumonia varies from one small area that may be  barely visible on chest X-ray to involvement throughout both lungs. Greater involvement of the lungs may indicate a more serious infection.  The infection can spread into the blood.  There can be complications like abscesses or pockets of pus.  There can be respiratory failure requiring a ventilator. Pneumonias can occur in any part of the lung.  Pneumonias can involve the bronchial air tubes and spread into the lung or involve an entire lobe of the lung.  Pneumonias can also involve the lung around the air sacs. Pneumonia from aspiration occurs when a foreign substance is inhaled into the lung.  This causes a direct insult to the lung.  This type of pneumonia has characteristic location depending on if the patient is recumbent or standing. Productive cough, fevers, shortness of breath, and fatigue are common. Pneumonia is an infection of the lung that can be caused by bacteria, viruses, and fungi.  Aspiration pneumonia is caused by direct entry of a foreign substance into the lung.  Some organisms infect patients in the community or hospital setting while others infect those who have weakened immune systems. No, not always.  Some pneumonias are hard or impossible to see on X-ray.  Other pneumonias are hidden by overlying structures in the chest.   For example, a big blood vessel in front of a pneumonia on chest X-ray can hide it or make it hard to see. Some pneumonias do not appear on chest X-rays until after the symptoms have begun.   It is therefore important for your doctor to consider a chest X-ray as one tool for the diagnosis of pneumonia. In addition to chest X-rays, CT scans are great at diagnosing pneumonia.  CTs use more radiation and are more expensive however.  Sputum cultures are good at identifying organisms that are causing the pneumonia. Other more invasive tests like bronchoscopy or biopsy is seldom used. Pneumonia on chest X-ray will most commonly be a white or hazy area in the lung.  Some pneumonias are difficult or impossible to see on X-ray.  Many different kinds of organisms can cause a pneumonia.  The imaging will not tell us what kind of organism is causing the pneumonia.   Imaging is just one tool used for the diagnosis of pneumonia. Please read the disclaimer The lung apex is the very top of the lung.  The lung apex is in the upper lobes of the lungs. A characteristic set of abnormalities… 

				Read More What Are Some Conditions that Happen At The Lung Apex?Continue
 
 Please read the disclaimer The mediastinum is the space between the right and left lungs in the chest.  The mediastinum is in the middle of the chest extending from the… 

				Read More What Is The Mediastinum?Continue
 
 Please read the disclaimer A nodule is a spot in the lung.  Solitary pulmonary nodule means that there is only one in the lung.  A nodule is a common finding… 

				Read More Solitary Pulmonary Nodule In LungContinue
 
 Please read the disclaimer Lucent area is a non specific term on chest X-ray which means that an area is darker than expected.  As X-rays pass through structures in the… 

				Read More Lucent Area on Chest X-rayContinue
 
 Please read the disclaimer An esophagram performed with barium is a common test done to examine the esophagus for abnormalities.  An advantage of this test is that we can observe… 

				Read More Barium Esophagram ProcedureContinue
 
 Please read the disclaimer Subcutaneous emphysema is a finding on imaging tests that indicates air trapped within the soft tissues, typically beneath the skin. It can occur due to trauma,… 

				Read More Subcutaneous EmphysemaContinue
 
 Our mission is to help you understand your radiology reports by explaining complex medical terms in plain English. © 2025 Albert Mendelson, MD | Star Direct, Inc. | About The Author | Imaging Categories | Disclaimer | Privacy Policy | Contact