https://www.wikihow.com/Read-a-Chest-X-Ray


Last Updated: February 24, 2025

Approved
 
		This article was co-authored by Ni-Cheng Liang, MD. Dr. Ni-Cheng Liang is a board certified Pulmonologist and the Director of Pulmonary Integrative Medicine at Coastal Pulmonary Associates affiliated with the Scripps Health Network in San Diego, California. She also serves as a Voluntary Assistant Professor of Medicine at the University of California San Diego School of Medicine while volunteering for the UCSD Medical Student-Run Free Clinic for uninsured patients. With over 15 years of experience, Dr. Liang specializes in pulmonary and respiratory medical concerns, mindfulness teaching, physician wellness, and integrative medicine. Dr. Liang received her Doctor of Medicine (MD) from the University of Maryland School of Medicine. Dr. Liang was voted as a San Diego Top Doctor in 2017 and 2019. She was also awarded the 2019 American Lung Association San Diego Lung Health Provider of the Year.

			
			There are 11 references cited in this article, which can be found at the bottom of the page.

			
			wikiHow marks an article as reader-approved once it receives enough positive feedback. This article received 16 testimonials and 81% of readers who voted found it helpful, earning it our reader-approved status.

			
			 This article has been viewed 1,190,337 times.


		 You have probably seen a chest x-ray (chest radiograph), or might even have had one taken. Have you ever wondered how to read a chest x-ray? When looking at a radiograph, remember that it is a 2-dimensional representation of a 3-dimensional object. Height and width are maintained, but depth is lost. The left side of the film represents the right side of the individual, and vice versa. Air appears black, fat appears gray, soft tissues and water appear as lighter shades of gray, and bone and metal appear white. The denser the tissue, the whiter it will appear on x-ray. Denser tissues appear radiopaque, bright on the film; less dense tissues appear radiolucent, dark on the film.
 Medical Disclaimer
 The content of this article is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, examination, diagnosis, or treatment. You should always contact your doctor or other qualified healthcare professional before starting, changing, or stopping any kind of health treatment.
  Read More...
 To read a chest x-ray, start by looking for markers on it, like "L" for left, "R" for right, "PA" for posteroanterior, and "AP" for anteroposterior, to identify the positioning of the x-ray. Then, find the airway on the x-ray and check to see if it's patent and midline. You should also look at the bones to see if there are any fractures, lesions, or defects. Next, check to see if the diaphragm is flat, which could indicate emphysema, or raised, which could be a sign of pneumonia. Also, examine the heart, lung fields, cardiac silhouette, and hila. To learn how to analyze each section of a chest x-ray, keep reading!
Did this summary help you?YesNo


 Ms Rosanne Fernando Mar 14, 2023 Ms Rosanne Fernando Mar 14, 2023 Viapak Dhawan May 4, 2016 Kathi Joseph May 4, 2016 Sahab Bin Abdallah Mar 18, 2019 Nia Hemraj Oct 9, 2016 Follow Us wikiHow Tech Help Pro: Develop the tech skills you need for work and life 