https://www.radiologyinfo.org/en/info/article-chest-xray-report
Your healthcare provider (usually a doctor, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant) sometimes uses medical imaging tests to diagnose and treat diseases. A radiologist is a doctor who supervises these exams, reads and interprets the images, and writes a report for your healthcare provider. This report may contain medical terminology and complex information. If you have any questions, be sure to talk to your provider or ask if you can speak to a radiologist (not all imaging centers make their radiologists available for patient questions).  Doctors typically use this procedure to help diagnose breathing difficulties, a bad or persistent cough, chest pain or injury, and fever. They also use it to diagnose diseases such as:  Doctors also may use a chest x-ray to check the positioning of medical devices or to diagnose fluid or air collection around the lungs. For more information, see the Chest X-ray page. top of page This section usually shows the date, time, and type of exam. This is usually dictated by your symptoms or needs.  Example: This section usually lists the information that your ordering provider has listed for the radiologist when they ordered your exam. It allows your ordering provider to explain what symptoms you are having and why they are ordering the radiology test. This helps the radiologist accurately interpret your test and focus the report on your symptoms and past medical history. Sometimes the radiologist who reads your exam will also add information that they find in your chart or in the forms that you fill out before your imaging test. Example: If you have had relevant prior imaging exams, the radiologist will compare them to the new imaging exam. If so, the radiologist will list them here. Comparisons usually involve exams of the same body area and exam type. It is always a good idea to get any prior imaging exams from other hospitals/facilities and give them to the radiology department where you are having your test. Having these older exams can be very helpful to the radiologist. In some cases, simply having your prior test available will make a difference in what the radiologist recommends if they see something on your scan.  The prior exam can help show if a previous finding is unchanged or if there is a new finding. Example: This section describes how the exam was done and whether contrast was used. Because this section is used for documentation purposes, it is not typically useful for you or your doctor. However, it can be very helpful to a radiologist for any future exam if needed. Examples: This section lists what the radiologist saw in each area of the body in the exam. Your radiologist notes whether they think the area is normal, abnormal, or potentially abnormal. Sometimes an exam covers an area of the body but does not discuss any findings. This usually means that the radiologist looked but did not find any problems to tell your doctor. Some radiologists will report things in paragraph form, while others use a reporting style where each organ or region of the body is listed as a line with the findings. If the radiologist does not see anything concerning it may say “normal” or “unremarkable.” Example: Lines and Tube: None.
Lungs and Pleura: Lungs are clear.  No pneumothorax or pleural effusion. 
Heart and Mediastinum: Cardiomediastinal silhouette is within normal limits. 
Bones: Visualized osseous structures are unremarkable. In this section, the radiologist summarizes the findings and reports the most important findings that they see and possible causes for those findings. It also has recommendations for any follow-up actions. This section offers the most important information for decision-making. Therefore, it is the most important part of the radiology report for you and your healthcare team. For an abnormal or potentially abnormal finding, the radiologist may recommend: Sometimes the report does not answer the clinical question, and more exams may be needed. More exams may be necessary to follow-up on a suspicious or questionable finding. Example 1: New nodule in the left lung which is indeterminate (cannot be definitively diagnosed by the study).
RECOMMENDATION: Chest CT is advised for further characterization.  Example 2: Right lower lobe pneumonia.
RECOMMENDATION: Follow up chest radiograph is advised in 4-6 weeks to ensure resolution.  top of page Once the report is complete, the radiologist signs it, and sends the report to your doctor who will then discuss the results with you. The doctor may upload the report to your patient portal before they call you. If you read the report before talking to your doctor, don’t make assumptions about the report’s findings. Something that seems to be bad often turns out not to be a cause for concern.  Sometimes, you may have questions about your report that your doctor cannot answer. If so, talk to your facility's imaging staff. Many radiologists are happy to answer your questions. top of page 
       This page was reviewed on January 03, 2024
     Please type your comment or suggestion into the text box below. Note: we are unable to answer specific questions or offer individual medical advice or opinions. Images 

 Chest x-ray procedure Related Articles and Media Sponsored By Please note RadiologyInfo.org is not a medical facility. Please contact your physician with specific medical questions or for a referral to a radiologist or other physician. To locate a medical imaging or radiation oncology provider in your community, you can search the ACR-accredited facilities database.
 This website does not provide cost information. The costs for specific medical imaging tests, treatments and procedures may vary by geographic region. Discuss the fees associated with your prescribed procedure with your doctor, the medical facility staff and/or your insurance provider to get a better understanding of the possible charges you will incur. Web page review process: This Web page is reviewed regularly by a physician with expertise in the medical area presented and is further reviewed by committees from the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) and the American College of Radiology (ACR), comprising physicians with expertise in several radiologic areas. Outside links: For the convenience of our users, RadiologyInfo.org provides links to relevant websites. RadiologyInfo.org, RSNA and ACR are not responsible for the content contained on the web pages found at these links. 

Copyright © 2025 Radiological Society of North America, Inc. (RSNA).
            To help ensure current and accurate information, we do not permit copying but encourage linking to this site.
        