https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/pneumonia/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20354210
This chest X-ray shows an area of lung inflammation indicating the presence of pneumonia. This chest X-ray shows an area of lung inflammation indicating the presence of pneumonia. Your doctor will start by asking about your medical history and doing a physical exam, including listening to your lungs with a stethoscope to check for abnormal bubbling or crackling sounds that suggest pneumonia. If pneumonia is suspected, your doctor may recommend the following tests: Your doctor might order additional tests if you're older than age 65, are in the hospital, or have serious symptoms or health conditions. These may include: 
                Create your personalized vaccination plan.
             Treatment for pneumonia involves curing the infection and preventing complications. People who have community-acquired pneumonia usually can be treated at home with medication. Although most symptoms ease in a few days or weeks, the feeling of tiredness can persist for a month or more. Specific treatments depend on the type and severity of your pneumonia, your age and your overall health. The options include: You may need to be hospitalized if: You may be admitted to the intensive care unit if you need to be placed on a breathing machine (ventilator) or if your symptoms are severe. Children may be hospitalized if: There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form. Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview. ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox. Please, try again in a couple of minutes 
Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
     These tips can help you recover more quickly and decrease your risk of complications: You may start by seeing a primary care doctor or an emergency care doctor, or you may be referred to a doctor who specializes in infectious diseases or in lung disease (pulmonologist). Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment and know what to expect. Some basic questions to ask the doctor include: Don't hesitate to ask other questions. Be ready to answer questions your doctor may ask: To avoid making your condition worse: Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission. Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press. Make a gift to honor and celebrate the contributions of our world-class doctors. © 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.