https://www.radiologyinfo.org/en/info/pneumonia
Pneumonia is an infection that causes inflammation in one or both of the lungs and may be caused by a virus, bacteria, fungi or other germs.  Your doctor may conduct a physical exam and use chest x-ray, chest CT, chest ultrasound, or needle biopsy of the lung to help diagnose your condition. Your doctor may further evaluate your condition and lung function using thoracentesis, chest tube placement or image-guided abscess drainage. Pneumonia is an infection that causes inflammation in one or both of the lungs. It can be caused by a virus, bacteria, fungi or other germs. The infection is usually acquired when a person breathes in air carrying germs. Patients with pneumonia could have the following symptoms: Those most at risk for developing pneumonia are young children or people over the age of 65. People with existing health problems are also at increased risk. Risk factors and circumstances that may increase a person's chances of developing pneumonia include: Pneumonia can sometimes lead to serious complications, such as respiratory system failure, spread of infections, fluid surrounding the lungs, abscesses or uncontrolled inflammation throughout the body (sepsis). The condition can also be fatal, so it is important to seek immediate medical attention if you are experiencing these symptoms. top of page Your primary doctor will begin by asking you about your medical history and symptoms. You will also undergo a physical exam, so that your doctor can listen to your lungs. In checking for pneumonia, your doctor will listen for abnormal sounds like crackling, rumbling or wheezing. If your doctor thinks you may have pneumonia, an imaging test may be performed to confirm the diagnosis. One or more of the following tests may be ordered to evaluate for pneumonia: top of page The following image-guided treatments may be used for pneumonia: Each of these tests will help your doctor further evaluate your lungs and lung function or help determine the type of germ causing your pneumonia. top of page top of page 
       This page was reviewed on May 01, 2023
     Please type your comment or suggestion into the text box below. Note: we are unable to answer specific questions or offer individual medical advice or opinions. Images 

 Chest x-ray procedure.  Pediatric Content Related Articles and Media Sponsored By Please note RadiologyInfo.org is not a medical facility. Please contact your physician with specific medical questions or for a referral to a radiologist or other physician. To locate a medical imaging or radiation oncology provider in your community, you can search the ACR-accredited facilities database.
 This website does not provide cost information. The costs for specific medical imaging tests, treatments and procedures may vary by geographic region. Discuss the fees associated with your prescribed procedure with your doctor, the medical facility staff and/or your insurance provider to get a better understanding of the possible charges you will incur. Web page review process: This Web page is reviewed regularly by a physician with expertise in the medical area presented and is further reviewed by committees from the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) and the American College of Radiology (ACR), comprising physicians with expertise in several radiologic areas. Outside links: For the convenience of our users, RadiologyInfo.org provides links to relevant websites. RadiologyInfo.org, RSNA and ACR are not responsible for the content contained on the web pages found at these links. 

Copyright © 2025 Radiological Society of North America, Inc. (RSNA).
            To help ensure current and accurate information, we do not permit copying but encourage linking to this site.
        